PF.CONF(5)		      File Formats Manual		    PF.CONF(5)

NAME
     pf.conf - packet filter configuration file

DESCRIPTION
     The pf(4) packet filter modifies, drops, or passes packets according to
     rules or definitions specified in pf.conf.

     This is an overview of the sections in this manual page:

     PACKET FILTERING including network address translation (NAT).

     OPTIONS globally tune the behaviour of the packet filtering engine.

     QUEUEING provides rule-based bandwidth and traffic control.

     TABLES provide a method for dealing with large numbers of addresses.

     ANCHORS are containers for rules and tables.

     STATEFUL FILTERING tracks packets by state.

     TRAFFIC NORMALISATION includes scrub, fragment handling, and blocking
     spoofed traffic.

     OPERATING SYSTEM FINGERPRINTING is a method for detecting a host's
     operating system.

     EXAMPLES provides some example rulesets.

     GRAMMAR provides a complete BNF grammar reference.

     The current line can be extended over multiple lines using a backslash
     (`\').  Comments can be put anywhere in the file using a hash mark (`#'),
     and extend to the end of the current line.	 Care should be taken when
     commenting out multi-line text: the comment is effective until the end of
     the entire block.

     Argument names not beginning with a letter, digit, or underscore must be
     quoted.

     Additional configuration files can be included with the include keyword,
     for example:

	   include "/etc/pf/sub.filter.conf"

     A macro is defined with a command of the form name=value.	The macro name
     can contain letters, digits, and underscores and cannot be a reserved
     word (for example, pass, in, or out).  Within unquoted arguments, the
     string $name is later expanded to value.

     For example:

	   ext_if = "kue0"
	   all_ifs = "{" $ext_if lo0 "}"
	   pass out on $ext_if from any to any
	   pass in  on $ext_if proto tcp from any to any port 25

PACKET FILTERING
     pf(4) has the ability to block, pass, and match packets based on
     attributes of their layer 3 and layer 4 headers.  Filter rules determine
     which of these actions are taken; filter parameters specify the packets
     to which a rule applies.

     Each time a packet processed by the packet filter comes in on or goes out
     through an interface, the filter rules are evaluated in sequential order,
     from first to last.  For block and pass, the last matching rule decides
     what action is taken; if no rule matches the packet, the default action
     is to pass the packet without creating a state.  For match, rules are
     evaluated every time they match; the pass/block state of a packet remains
     unchanged.

     Most parameters are optional.  If a parameter is specified, the rule only
     applies to packets with matching attributes.  The matching for some
     parameters can be inverted with the ! operator.  Certain parameters can
     be expressed as lists, in which case pfctl(8) generates all needed rule
     combinations.

     By default pf(4) filters packets statefully: the first time a packet
     matches a pass rule, a state entry is created.  The packet filter
     examines each packet to see if it matches an existing state.  If it does,
     the packet is passed without evaluation of any rules.  After the
     connection is closed or times out, the state entry is automatically
     removed.

     The following actions can be used in the filter:

     block   The packet is blocked.  There are a number of ways in which a
	     block rule can behave when blocking a packet.  The default
	     behaviour is to drop packets silently, however this can be
	     overridden or made explicit either globally, by setting the
	     block-policy option, or on a per-rule basis with one of the
	     following options:

	     drop	   The packet is silently dropped.
	     return	   This causes a TCP RST to be returned for TCP
			   packets and an ICMP UNREACHABLE for other types of
			   packets.
	     return-icmp
	     return-icmp6  This causes ICMP messages to be returned for
			   packets which match the rule.  By default this is
			   an ICMP UNREACHABLE message, however this can be
			   overridden by specifying a message as a code or
			   number.
	     return-rst	   This applies only to TCP packets, and issues a TCP
			   RST which closes the connection.  An optional
			   parameter, ttl, may be given with a TTL value.

	     Options returning ICMP packets currently have no effect if pf(4)
	     operates on a bridge(4), as the code to support this feature has
	     not yet been implemented.

	     The simplest mechanism to block everything by default and only
	     pass packets that match explicit rules is specify a first filter
	     rule of:

		   block all

     match   The packet is matched.  This mechanism is used to provide fine
	     grained filtering without altering the block/pass state of a
	     packet.  match rules differ from block and pass rules in that
	     parameters are set every time a packet matches the rule, not only
	     on the last matching rule.	 For the following parameters, this
	     means that the parameter effectively becomes "sticky" until
	     explicitly overridden: nat-to, binat-to, rdr-to, queue, rtable,
	     and scrub.

	     log is different still, in that the action happens every time a
	     rule matches i.e. a single packet can get logged more than once.

     pass    The packet is passed; state is created unless the no state option
	     is specified.

     The following parameters can be used in the filter:

     in or out
	     A packet always comes in on, or goes out through, one interface.
	     in and out apply to incoming and outgoing packets; if neither are
	     specified, the rule will match packets in both directions.

     log (all | matches | to interface | user)
	     In addition to any action specified, log the packet.  Only the
	     packet that establishes the state is logged, unless the no state
	     option is specified.  The logged packets are sent to a pflog(4)
	     interface, by default pflog0; pflog0 is monitored by the
	     pflogd(8) logging daemon which logs to the file /var/log/pflog in
	     pcap binary format.

	     The keywords all, matches, to, and user are optional and can be
	     combined using commas, but must be enclosed in parentheses if
	     given.

	     Use all to force logging of all packets for a connection.	This
	     is not necessary when no state is explicitly specified.

	     If matches is specified, it logs the packet on all subsequent
	     matching rules.  It is often combined with to interface to avoid
	     adding noise to the default log file.

	     The keyword user logs the UID and PID of the socket on the local
	     host used to send or receive a packet, in addition to the normal
	     information.

	     To specify a logging interface other than pflog0, use the syntax
	     to interface.

     quick   If a packet matches a rule which has the quick option set, this
	     rule is considered the last matching rule, and evaluation of
	     subsequent rules is skipped.

     on interface | any
	     This rule applies only to packets coming in on, or going out
	     through, this particular interface or interface group.  For more
	     information on interface groups, see the group keyword in
	     ifconfig(8).  any will match any existing interface except
	     loopback ones.

     on rdomain number
	     This rule applies only to packets coming in on, or going out
	     through, this particular routing domain.

     inet | inet6
	     This rule applies only to packets of this address family.

     proto protocol
	     This rule applies only to packets of this protocol.  Common
	     protocols are ICMP, ICMP6, TCP, and UDP.  For a list of all the
	     protocol name to number mappings used by pfctl(8), see the file
	     /etc/protocols.

     from source port source os source to dest port dest
	     This rule applies only to packets with the specified source and
	     destination addresses and ports.

	     Addresses can be specified in CIDR notation (matching netblocks),
	     as symbolic host names, interface names or interface group names,
	     or as any of the following keywords:

	     any	  Any address.
	     no-route	  Any address which is not currently routable.
	     route label  Any address matching the given route(8) label.
	     self	  Expands to all addresses assigned to all interfaces.
	     <table>	  Any address matching the given table.
	     urpf-failed  Any source address that fails a unicast reverse path
			  forwarding (URPF) check, i.e. packets coming in on
			  an interface other than that which holds the route
			  back to the packet's source address.

	     Ranges of addresses are specified using the `-' operator.	For
	     instance: "10.1.1.10 - 10.1.1.12" means all addresses from
	     10.1.1.10 to 10.1.1.12, hence addresses 10.1.1.10, 10.1.1.11, and
	     10.1.1.12.

	     Interface names, interface group names, and self can have
	     modifiers appended:

	     :0		 Do not include interface aliases.
	     :broadcast	 Translates to the interface's broadcast address(es).
	     :network	 Translates to the network(s) attached to the
			 interface.
	     :peer	 Translates to the point-to-point interface's peer
			 address(es).

	     Host names may also have the :0 modifier appended to restrict the
	     name resolution to the first of each v4 and v6 address found.

	     Host name resolution and interface to address translation are
	     done at ruleset load-time.	 When the address of an interface (or
	     host name) changes (under DHCP or PPP, for instance), the ruleset
	     must be reloaded for the change to be reflected in the kernel.
	     Surrounding the interface name (and optional modifiers) in
	     parentheses changes this behaviour.  When the interface name is
	     surrounded by parentheses, the rule is automatically updated
	     whenever the interface changes its address.  The ruleset does not
	     need to be reloaded.  This is especially useful with NAT.

	     Ports can be specified either by number or by name.  For example,
	     port 80 can be specified as www.  For a list of all port name to
	     number mappings used by pfctl(8), see the file /etc/services.

	     Ports and ranges of ports are specified using these operators:

		   =	   (equal)
		   !=	   (unequal)
		   <	   (less than)
		   <=	   (less than or equal)
		   >	   (greater than)
		   >=	   (greater than or equal)
		   :	   (range including boundaries)
		   ><	   (range excluding boundaries)
		   <>	   (except range)

	     `><', `<>' and `:' are binary operators (they take two
	     arguments).  For instance:

	     port 2000:2004
		     means `all ports >= 2000 and <= 2004', hence ports 2000,
		     2001, 2002, 2003, and 2004.

	     port 2000 >< 2004
		     means `all ports > 2000 and < 2004', hence ports 2001,
		     2002, and 2003.

	     port 2000 <> 2004
		     means `all ports < 2000 or > 2004', hence ports 1-1999
		     and 2005-65535.

	     The operating system of the source host can be specified in the
	     case of TCP rules with the os modifier.  See the OPERATING SYSTEM
	     FINGERPRINTING section for more information.

	     The host, port, and os specifications are optional, as in the
	     following examples:

		   pass in all
		   pass in from any to any
		   pass in proto tcp from any port < 1024 to any
		   pass in proto tcp from any to any port 25
		   pass in proto tcp from 10.0.0.0/8 port >= 1024 \
			 to ! 10.1.2.3 port != ssh
		   pass in proto tcp from any os "OpenBSD"
		   pass in proto tcp from route "DTAG"

     The following additional parameters can be used in the filter:

     all     This is equivalent to `from any to any'.

     allow-opts
	     By default, packets with IPv4 options or IPv6 hop-by-hop or
	     destination options header are blocked.  When allow-opts is
	     specified for a pass rule, packets that pass the filter based on
	     that rule (last matching) do so even if they contain options.
	     For packets that match state, the rule that initially created the
	     state is used.  The implicit pass rule, that is used when a
	     packet does not match any rules, does not allow IP options or
	     option headers.  Note that IPv6 packets with type 0 routing
	     headers are always dropped.

     divert-packet port port
	     Used to send matching packets to divert(4) sockets bound to port
	     port.  If the default option of fragment reassembly is enabled,
	     scrubbing with reassemble tcp is also enabled for divert-packet
	     rules.

     divert-reply
	     Used to receive replies for sockets that are bound to addresses
	     which are not local to the machine.  See setsockopt(2) for
	     information on how to bind these sockets.

     divert-to host port port
	     Used to redirect packets to a local socket bound to host and
	     port.  The packets will not be modified, preserving the original
	     destination address for the application to access.	 SOCK_STREAM
	     connections can access the original destination address using
	     getsockname(2).  SOCK_DGRAM sockets can be configured with the
	     ip(4) IP_RECVDSTADDR and IP_RECVDSTPORT socket options when
	     receiving IPv4 packets, or the ip6(4) IPV6_RECVPKTINFO and
	     IPV6_RECVDSTPORT socket options when receiving IPv6 packets.

     flags a/b | any
	     This rule only applies to TCP packets that have the flags a set
	     out of set b.  Flags not specified in b are ignored.  For
	     stateful connections, the default is flags S/SA.  To indicate
	     that flags should not be checked at all, specify flags any.  The
	     flags are: (F)IN, (S)YN, (R)ST, (P)USH, (A)CK, (U)RG, (E)CE, and
	     C(W)R.

	     flags S/S	  Flag SYN is set.  The other flags are ignored.

	     flags S/SA	  This is the default setting for stateful
			  connections.	Out of SYN and ACK, exactly SYN may be
			  set.	SYN, SYN+PSH, and SYN+RST match, but SYN+ACK,
			  ACK, and ACK+RST do not.  This is more restrictive
			  than the previous example.

	     flags /SFRA  If the first set is not specified, it defaults to
			  none.	 All of SYN, FIN, RST, and ACK must be unset.

	     Because flags S/SA is applied by default (unless no state is
	     specified), only the initial SYN packet of a TCP handshake will
	     create a state for a TCP connection.  It is possible to be less
	     restrictive, and allow state creation from intermediate (non-SYN)
	     packets, by specifying flags any.	This will cause pf(4) to
	     synchronize to existing connections, for instance if one flushes
	     the state table.  However, states created from such intermediate
	     packets may be missing connection details such as the TCP window
	     scaling factor.  States which modify the packet flow, such as
	     those affected by af-to, modulate state, nat-to, rdr-to, or
	     synproxy state options, or scrubbed with reassemble tcp, will
	     also not be recoverable from intermediate packets.	 Such
	     connections will stall and time out.

     group group
	     Similar to user, this rule only applies to packets of sockets
	     owned by the specified group.

     icmp-type type [code code]
     icmp6-type type [code code]
	     This rule only applies to ICMP or ICMP6 packets with the
	     specified type and code.  Text names for ICMP types and codes are
	     listed in icmp(4) and icmp6(4).  The protocol and the ICMP type
	     indicator (icmp-type or icmp6-type) must match.

	     ICMP responses are not permitted unless they either match an
	     existing request, or unless no state or keep state (sloppy) is
	     specified.

     label string
	     Adds a label to the rule, which can be used to identify the rule.
	     For instance, `pfctl -s labels' shows per-rule statistics for
	     rules that have labels.

	     The following macros can be used in labels:

		   $dstaddr	The destination IP address.
		   $dstport	The destination port specification.
		   $if		The interface.
		   $nr		The rule number.
		   $proto	The protocol name.
		   $srcaddr	The source IP address.
		   $srcport	The source port specification.

	     For example:
		   ips = "{ 1.2.3.4, 1.2.3.5 }"
		   pass in proto tcp from any to $ips \
			 port > 1023 label "$dstaddr:$dstport"

	     Expands to:
		   pass in inet proto tcp from any to 1.2.3.4 \
			 port > 1023 label "1.2.3.4:>1023"
		   pass in inet proto tcp from any to 1.2.3.5 \
			 port > 1023 label "1.2.3.5:>1023"

	     The macro expansion for the label directive occurs only at
	     configuration file parse time, not during runtime.

     max-pkt-rate number/seconds
	     Measure the rate of packets matching the rule and states created
	     by it.  When the specified rate is exceeded, the rule stops
	     matching.	Only packets in the direction in which the state was
	     created are considered, so that typically requests are counted
	     and replies are not.  For example, to pass up to 100 ICMP packets
	     per 10 seconds:

		   block in proto icmp
		   pass in proto icmp max-pkt-rate 100/10

	     When the rate is exceeded, all ICMP is blocked until the rate
	     falls below 100 per 10 seconds again.

     once    Create a one shot rule.  The first matching packet marks the rule
	     as expired.  Expired rules are skipped and hidden, unless
	     pfctl(8) is used in debug or verbose mode.

     probability number%
	     A probability attribute can be attached to a rule, with a value
	     set between 0 and 100%, in which case the rule is honoured using
	     the given probability value.  For example, the following rule
	     will drop 20% of incoming ICMP packets:

		   block in proto icmp probability 20%

     prio number
	     Only match packets which have the given queueing priority
	     assigned.

     [!]received-on interface
	     Only match packets which were received on the specified interface
	     (or interface group).  any will match any existing interface
	     except loopback ones.

     rtable number
	     Used to select an alternate routing table for the routing lookup.
	     Only effective before the route lookup happened, i.e. when
	     filtering inbound.

     set delay milliseconds
	     Packets matching this rule will be delayed at the outbound
	     interface by the given number of milliseconds.

     set prio priority | (priority, priority)
	     Packets matching this rule will be assigned a specific queueing
	     priority.	Priorities are assigned as integers 0 through 7, with
	     a default priority of 3.  If the packet is transmitted on a
	     vlan(4) interface, the queueing priority will also be written as
	     the priority code point in the 802.1Q VLAN header.	 If two
	     priorities are given, TCP ACKs with no data payload and packets
	     which have a TOS of lowdelay will be assigned to the second one.
	     Packets with a higher priority number are processed first, and
	     packets with the same priority are processed in the order in
	     which they are received.

	     For example:

		   pass in proto tcp to port 25 set prio 2
		   pass in proto tcp to port 22 set prio (2, 5)

	     The interface priority queues accessed by the set prio keyword
	     are always enabled and do not require any additional
	     configuration, unlike the queues described below and in the
	     QUEUEING section.

     set queue queue | (queue, queue)
	     Packets matching this rule will be assigned to the specified
	     queue.  If two queues are given, packets which have a TOS of
	     lowdelay and TCP ACKs with no data payload will be assigned to
	     the second one.  See QUEUEING for setup details.

	     For example:

		   pass in proto tcp to port 25 set queue mail
		   pass in proto tcp to port 22 set queue(ssh_bulk, ssh_prio)

     set tos string | number
	     Enforces a TOS for matching packets.  string may be one of
	     critical, inetcontrol, lowdelay, netcontrol, throughput,
	     reliability, or one of the DiffServ Code Points: ef, af11 ...
	     af43, cs0 ... cs7; number may be either a hex or decimal number.

     tag string
	     Packets matching this rule will be tagged with the specified
	     string.  The tag acts as an internal marker that can be used to
	     identify these packets later on.  This can be used, for example,
	     to provide trust between interfaces and to determine if packets
	     have been processed by translation rules.	Tags are "sticky",
	     meaning that the packet will be tagged even if the rule is not
	     the last matching rule.  Further matching rules can replace the
	     tag with a new one but will not remove a previously applied tag.
	     A packet is only ever assigned one tag at a time.	Tags take the
	     same macros as labels (see above).

     [!]tagged string
	     Used with filter or translation rules to specify that packets
	     must already be tagged with the given string in order to match
	     the rule.

     tos string | number
	     This rule applies to packets with the specified TOS bits set.
	     string may be one of critical, inetcontrol, lowdelay, netcontrol,
	     throughput, reliability, or one of the DiffServ Code Points: ef,
	     af11 ... af43, cs0 ... cs7; number may be either a hex or decimal
	     number.

	     For example, the following rules are identical:

		   pass all tos lowdelay
		   pass all tos 0x10
		   pass all tos 16

     user user
	     This rule only applies to packets of sockets owned by the
	     specified user.  For outgoing connections initiated from the
	     firewall, this is the user that opened the connection.  For
	     incoming connections to the firewall itself, this is the user
	     that listens on the destination port.

	     When listening sockets are bound to the wildcard address, pf(4)
	     cannot determine if a connection is destined for the firewall
	     itself.  To avoid false matches on just the destination port,
	     combine a user rule with source or destination address self.

	     All packets, both outgoing and incoming, of one connection are
	     associated with the same user and group.  Only TCP and UDP
	     packets can be associated with users.

	     The user and group arguments refer to the effective (as opposed
	     to the real) IDs, in case the socket is created by a
	     setuid/setgid process.  User and group IDs are stored when a
	     socket is created; when a process creates a listening socket as
	     root (for instance, by binding to a privileged port) and
	     subsequently changes to another user ID (to drop privileges), the
	     credentials will remain root.

	     User and group IDs can be specified as either numbers or names.
	     The syntax is similar to the one for ports.  The following
	     example allows only selected users to open outgoing connections:

		   block out proto tcp all
		   pass	 out proto tcp from self user { < 1000, dhartmei }

	     The example below permits users with uid between 1000 and 1500 to
	     open connections:

		   block out proto tcp all
		   pass	 out proto tcp from self user { 999 >< 1501 }

	     The `:' operator, which works for port number matching, does not
	     work for user and group match.

   Translation
     Translation options modify either the source or destination address and
     port of the packets associated with a stateful connection.	 pf(4)
     modifies the specified address and/or port in the packet and recalculates
     IP, TCP, and UDP checksums as necessary.

     If specified on a match rule, subsequent rules will see packets as they
     look after any addresses and ports have been translated.  These rules
     will therefore have to filter based on the translated address and port
     number.

     The state entry created permits pf(4) to keep track of the original
     address for traffic associated with that state and correctly direct
     return traffic for that connection.

     Different types of translation are possible with pf:

     af-to     Translation between different address families (NAT64) is
	       handled using af-to rules.  Because address family translation
	       overrides the routing table, it's only possible to use af-to on
	       inbound rules, and a source address for the resulting
	       translation must always be specified.

	       The optional second argument is the host or subnet the original
	       addresses are translated into for the destination.  The lowest
	       bits of the original destination address form the host part of
	       the new destination address according to the specified subnet.
	       It is possible to embed a complete IPv4 address into an IPv6
	       address using a network prefix of /96 or smaller.

	       When a destination address is not specified, it is assumed that
	       the host part is 32-bit long.  For IPv6 to IPv4 translation
	       this would mean using only the lower 32 bits of the original
	       IPv6 destination address.  For IPv4 to IPv6 translation the
	       destination subnet defaults to the subnet of the new IPv6
	       source address with a prefix length of /96.  See RFC 6052
	       Section 2.2 for details on how the prefix determines the
	       destination address encoding.

	       For example, the following rules are identical:

		     pass in inet af-to inet6 from 2001:db8::1 to 2001:db8::/96
		     pass in inet af-to inet6 from 2001:db8::1

	       In the above example the matching IPv4 packets will be modified
	       to have a source address of 2001:db8::1 and a destination
	       address will get prefixed with 2001:db8::/96, e.g.
	       198.51.100.100 will be translated to 2001:db8::c633:6464.

	       In the reverse case the following rules are identical:

		     pass in inet6 from any to 64:ff9b::/96 af-to inet \
			     from 198.51.100.1 to 0.0.0.0/0
		     pass in inet6 from any to 64:ff9b::/96 af-to inet \
			     from 198.51.100.1

	       The destination IPv4 address is assumed to be embedded inside
	       the original IPv6 destination address, e.g. 64:ff9b::c633:6464
	       will be translated to 198.51.100.100.

	       The current implementation will only extract IPv4 addresses
	       from the IPv6 addresses with a prefix length of /96 and
	       greater.

     binat-to  A binat-to rule specifies a bidirectional mapping between an
	       external IP netblock and an internal IP netblock.  It expands
	       to an outbound nat-to rule and an inbound rdr-to rule.

     nat-to    A nat-to option specifies that IP addresses are to be changed
	       as the packet traverses the given interface.  This technique
	       allows one or more IP addresses on the translating host to
	       support network traffic for a larger range of machines on an
	       "inside" network.  Although in theory any IP address can be
	       used on the inside, it is strongly recommended that one of the
	       address ranges defined by RFC 1918 be used.  Those netblocks
	       are:

		     10.0.0.0 - 10.255.255.255 (all of net 10, i.e. 10/8)
		     172.16.0.0 - 172.31.255.255 (i.e. 172.16/12)
		     192.168.0.0 - 192.168.255.255 (i.e. 192.168/16)

	       nat-to is usually applied outbound.  If applied inbound, nat-to
	       to a local IP address is not supported.

     rdr-to    The packet is redirected to another destination and possibly a
	       different port.	rdr-to can optionally specify port ranges
	       instead of single ports.	 For instance:

	       match in ... port 2000:2999 rdr-to ... port 4000
		       redirects ports 2000 to 2999 (inclusive) to port 4000.

	       match in ... port 2000:2999 rdr-to ... port 4000:*
		       redirects port 2000 to 4000, port 2001 to 4001, ...,
		       port 2999 to 4999.

	       rdr-to is usually applied inbound.  If applied outbound, rdr-to
	       to a local IP address is not supported.

     In addition to modifying the address, some translation rules may modify
     source or destination ports for TCP or UDP connections; implicitly in the
     case of nat-to options and explicitly in the case of rdr-to ones.	Port
     numbers are never translated with a binat-to rule.

     Translation options apply only to packets that pass through the specified
     interface, and if no interface is specified, translation is applied to
     packets on all interfaces.	 For instance, redirecting port 80 on an
     external interface to an internal web server will only work for
     connections originating from the outside.	Connections to the address of
     the external interface from local hosts will not be redirected, since
     such packets do not actually pass through the external interface.
     Redirections cannot reflect packets back through the interface they
     arrive on, they can only be redirected to hosts connected to different
     interfaces or to the firewall itself.

     However packets may be redirected to hosts connected to the interface the
     packet arrived on by using redirection with NAT.  For example:

	   pass in on $int_if proto tcp from $int_net to $ext_if port 80 \
		   rdr-to $server
	   pass out on $int_if proto tcp to $server port 80 \
		   received-on $int_if nat-to $int_if

     Note that redirecting external incoming connections to the loopback
     address will effectively allow an external host to connect to daemons
     bound solely to the loopback address, circumventing the traditional
     blocking of such connections on a real interface.	For example:

	   pass in on egress proto tcp from any to any port smtp \
		   rdr-to 127.0.0.1 port spamd

     Unless this effect is desired, any of the local non-loopback addresses
     should be used instead as the redirection target, which allows external
     connections only to daemons bound to this address or not bound to any
     address.

     For af-to, nat-to and rdr-to options for which there is a single
     redirection address which has a subnet mask smaller than 32 for IPv4 or
     128 for IPv6 (more than one IP address), a variety of different methods
     for assigning this address can be used:

     bitmask
	   The bitmask option applies the network portion of the redirection
	   address to the address to be modified (source with nat-to,
	   destination with rdr-to).

     least-states [sticky-address]
	   The least-states option selects the address with the least active
	   states from a given address pool and considers given weights
	   associated with address(es).	 Weights can be specified between 1
	   and 65535.  Addresses with higher weights are selected more often.

	   sticky-address can be specified to ensure that multiple connections
	   from the same source are mapped to the same redirection address.
	   Associations are destroyed as soon as there are no longer states
	   which refer to them; in order to make the mappings last beyond the
	   lifetime of the states, increase the global options with set
	   timeout src.track.

     random [sticky-address]
	   The random option selects an address at random within the defined
	   block of addresses.	sticky-address is as described above.

     round-robin [sticky-address]
	   The round-robin option loops through the redirection address(es)
	   and considers given weights associated with address(es).  Weights
	   can be specified between 1 and 65535.  Addresses with higher
	   weights are selected more often.  sticky-address is as described
	   above.

     source-hash [key] [sticky-address]
	   The source-hash option uses a hash of the source address to
	   determine the redirection address, ensuring that the redirection
	   address is always the same for a given source.  An optional key can
	   be specified after this keyword either in hex or as a string; by
	   default pfctl(8) randomly generates a key for source-hash every
	   time the ruleset is reloaded.  sticky-address is as described
	   above.

     static-port
	   With nat-to rules, the static-port option prevents pf(4) from
	   modifying the source port on TCP and UDP packets.

     When more than one redirection address or a table is specified, bitmask
     is not permitted as a pool type.

   Routing
     If a packet matches a rule with one of the following route options set,
     the packet filter will route the packet according to the type of route
     option.  When such a rule creates state, the route option is also applied
     to all packets matching the same connection.

     dup-to    The dup-to option creates a duplicate of the packet and routes
	       it like route-to.  The original packet gets routed as it
	       normally would.

     reply-to  The reply-to option is similar to route-to, but routes packets
	       that pass in the opposite direction (replies) to the specified
	       address.	 Opposite direction is only defined in the context of
	       a state entry, and reply-to is useful only in rules that create
	       state.  It can be used on systems with multiple paths to the
	       internet to ensure that replies to an incoming network
	       connection to a particular address are sent using the path
	       associated with that address (symmetric routing enforcement).

     route-to  The route-to option routes the packet to the specified
	       destination address instead of the destination address in the
	       packet header.  When a route-to rule creates state, only
	       packets that pass in the same direction as the filter rule
	       specifies will be routed in this way.  Packets passing in the
	       opposite direction (replies) are not affected and are routed
	       normally.

     For the dup-to, reply-to, and route-to route options for which there is a
     single redirection address which has a subnet mask smaller than 32 for
     IPv4 or 128 for IPv6 (more than one IP address), the methods
     least-states, random, round-robin, and source-hash, as described above,
     can be used.

OPTIONS
     pf(4) may be tuned for various situations using the set command.

     set block-policy drop | return
	     The block-policy option sets the default behaviour for the packet
	     block action:

	     drop    Packet is silently dropped.
	     return  A TCP RST is returned for blocked TCP packets, an ICMP
		     UNREACHABLE is returned for blocked UDP packets, and all
		     other packets are silently dropped.

	     The default value is drop.

     set debug level
	     Set the debug level, which limits the severity of log messages
	     printed by pf(4).	This should be a keyword from the following
	     ordered list (highest to lowest): emerg, alert, crit, err,
	     warning, notice, info, and debug.	These keywords correspond to
	     the similar (LOG_) values specified to the syslog(3) library
	     routine.  The default value is err.

     set fingerprints filename
	     Load fingerprints of known operating systems from the given
	     filename.	By default fingerprints of known operating systems are
	     automatically loaded from pf.os(5), but can be overridden via
	     this option.  Setting this option may leave a small period of
	     time where the fingerprints referenced by the currently active
	     ruleset are inconsistent until the new ruleset finishes loading.
	     The default location for fingerprints is /etc/pf.os.

     set hostid number
	     The 32-bit hostid number identifies this firewall's state table
	     entries to other firewalls in a pfsync(4) failover cluster.  By
	     default the hostid is set to a pseudo-random value, however it
	     may be desirable to manually configure it, for example to more
	     easily identify the source of state table entries.	 The hostid
	     may be specified in either decimal or hexadecimal.

     set limit limit-item number
	     Sets hard limits on the memory pools used by the packet filter.
	     See pool(9) for an explanation of memory pools.

	     Limits can be set on the following:

	     states	    Set the maximum number of entries in the memory
			    pool used by state table entries (those generated
			    by pass rules which do not specify no state).  The
			    default is 100000.

	     src-nodes	    Set the maximum number of entries in the memory
			    pool used for tracking source IP addresses
			    (generated by the sticky-address and src.track
			    options).  The default is 10000.

	     frags	    Set the maximum number of entries in the memory
			    pool used for fragment reassembly.	The maximum
			    may not exceed, and should be well below, the
			    maximum number of mbuf clusters (sysctl
			    kern.maxclusters) in the system.  The default is
			    NMBCLUSTERS/32.  NMBCLUSTERS defines the total
			    number of packets which can exist in-system at any
			    one time.  Refer to <machine/param.h> for the
			    platform-specific value.

	     tables	    Set the number of tables that can exist.  The
			    default is 1000.

	     table-entries  Set the number of addresses that can be stored in
			    tables.  The default is 200000, or 100000 on
			    machines with less than 100MB of physical memory.

	     pktdelay_pkts  Set the maximum number of packets that can be held
			    in the delay queue.	 The default is 10000.

	     anchors	    Set the number of anchors that can exist.  The
			    default is 512.

	     Multiple limits can be combined on a single line:

		   set limit { states 20000, frags 2000, src-nodes 2000 }

     set loginterface interface | none
	     Enable collection of packet and byte count statistics for the
	     given interface or interface group.  These statistics can be
	     viewed using:

		   # pfctl -s info

	     In this example pf(4) collects statistics on the interface named
	     dc0:

		   set loginterface dc0

	     One can disable the loginterface using:

		   set loginterface none

	     The default value is none.

     set optimization environment
	     Optimize state timeouts for one of the following network
	     environments:

	     aggressive
		     Aggressively expire connections.  This can greatly reduce
		     the memory usage of the firewall at the cost of dropping
		     idle connections early.
	     conservative
		     Extremely conservative settings.  Avoid dropping
		     legitimate connections at the expense of greater memory
		     utilization (possibly much greater on a busy network) and
		     slightly increased processor utilization.
	     high-latency
		     A high-latency environment (such as a satellite
		     connection).
	     normal  A normal network environment.  Suitable for almost all
		     networks.
	     satellite
		     Alias for high-latency.

	     The default value is normal.

     set reassemble yes | no [no-df]
	     The reassemble option is used to enable or disable the reassembly
	     of fragmented packets, and can be set to yes (the default) or no.
	     If no-df is also specified, fragments with the "dont-fragment"
	     bit set are reassembled too, instead of being dropped; the
	     reassembled packet will have the "dont-fragment" bit cleared.
	     The default value is yes.

     set ruleset-optimization level
	     basic    Enable basic ruleset optimization.  This is the default
		      behaviour.  Basic ruleset optimization does four things
		      to improve the performance of ruleset evaluations:

		      1.   remove duplicate rules
		      2.   remove rules that are a subset of another rule
		      3.   combine multiple rules into a table when
			   advantageous
		      4.   reorder the rules to improve evaluation performance

	     none     Disable the ruleset optimizer.
	     profile  Uses the currently loaded ruleset as a feedback profile
		      to tailor the ordering of quick rules to actual network
		      traffic.

	     It is important to note that the ruleset optimizer will modify
	     the ruleset to improve performance.  A side effect of the ruleset
	     modification is that per-rule accounting statistics will have
	     different meanings than before.  If per-rule accounting is
	     important for billing purposes or whatnot, either the ruleset
	     optimizer should not be used or a label field should be added to
	     all of the accounting rules to act as optimization barriers.

	     Optimization can also be set as a command-line argument to
	     pfctl(8), overriding the settings in pf.conf.

     set skip on ifspec
	     List interfaces for which packets should not be filtered.
	     Packets passing in or out on such interfaces are passed as if pf
	     was disabled, i.e. pf does not process them in any way.  This can
	     be useful on loopback and other virtual interfaces, when packet
	     filtering is not desired and can have unexpected effects.	PF
	     filters traffic on all interfaces by default.

     set state-defaults state-option, ...
	     The state-defaults option sets the state options for states
	     created from rules without an explicit keep state.	 For example:

		   set state-defaults pflow, no-sync

     set state-policy if-bound | floating
	     The state-policy option sets the default behaviour for states:

	     if-bound  States are bound to an interface.
	     floating  States can match packets on any interfaces (the
		       default).

     set syncookies never | always | adaptive
	     When syncookies are active, pf will answer each and every
	     incoming TCP SYN with a syncookie SYNACK, without allocating any
	     resources.	 Upon reception of the client's ACK in response to the
	     syncookie SYNACK, pf will evaluate the ruleset and create state
	     if the ruleset permits it, complete the three way handshake with
	     the target host, and continue the connection with synproxy in
	     place.  This allows pf to be resilient against large synflood
	     attacks, which could otherwise exhaust the state table.  Due to
	     the blind answers to each and every SYN, syncookies share the
	     caveats of synproxy: seemingly accepting connections that will be
	     dropped later on.

	     never     pf will never send syncookie SYNACKs (the default).
	     always    pf will always send syncookie SYNACKs.
	     adaptive  pf will enable syncookie mode when a given percentage
		       of the state table is used up by half-open TCP
		       connections, such as those that saw the initial SYN but
		       didn't finish the three way handshake.  The thresholds
		       for entering and leaving syncookie mode can be
		       specified using:

			     set syncookies adaptive (start 25%, end 12%)

     set timeout variable value
	     frag	Seconds before an unassembled fragment is expired (60
			by default).
	     interval	Interval between purging expired states and fragments
			(10 seconds by default).
	     src.track	Length of time to retain a source tracking entry after
			the last state expires (0 by default, which means
			there is no global limit.  The value is defined by the
			rule which creates the state.).

	     When a packet matches a stateful connection, the seconds to live
	     for the connection will be updated to that of the protocol and
	     modifier which corresponds to the connection state.  Each packet
	     which matches this state will reset the TTL.  Tuning these values
	     may improve the performance of the firewall at the risk of
	     dropping valid idle connections.  Alternatively, these values may
	     be adjusted collectively in a manner suitable for a specific
	     environment using set optimization (see above).

	     tcp.closed (90 seconds by default)
		     The state after one endpoint sends an RST.
	     tcp.closing (900 seconds by default)
		     The state after the first FIN has been sent.
	     tcp.established (24 hours by default)
		     The fully established state.
	     tcp.finwait (45 seconds by default)
		     The state after both FINs have been exchanged and the
		     connection is closed.  Some hosts (notably web servers on
		     Solaris) send TCP packets even after closing the
		     connection.  Increasing tcp.finwait (and possibly
		     tcp.closing) can prevent blocking of such packets.
	     tcp.first (120 seconds by default)
		     The state after the first packet.
	     tcp.opening (30 seconds by default)
		     The state after the second packet but before both
		     endpoints have acknowledged the connection.
	     tcp.tsdiff (30 seconds by default)
		     Maximum allowed time difference between RFC 1323
		     compliant packet timestamps.

	     ICMP and UDP are handled in a fashion similar to TCP, but with a
	     much more limited set of states:

	     icmp.error (10 seconds by default)
		     The state after an ICMP error came back in response to an
		     ICMP packet.
	     icmp.first (20 seconds by default)
		     The state after the first packet.
	     udp.first (60 seconds by default)
		     The state after the first packet.
	     udp.multiple (60 seconds by default)
		     The state if both hosts have sent packets.
	     udp.single (30 seconds by default)
		     The state if the source host sends more than one packet
		     but the destination host has never sent one back.

	     Other protocols are handled similarly to UDP:

	     other.first (60 seconds by default)
	     other.multiple (60 seconds by default)
	     other.single (30 seconds by default)

	     Timeout values can be reduced adaptively as the number of state
	     table entries grows.

	     adaptive.start (60000 states by default)
		     When the number of state entries exceeds this value,
		     adaptive scaling begins.  All timeout values are scaled
		     linearly with factor (adaptive.end - number of states) /
		     (adaptive.end - adaptive.start).
	     adaptive.end (120000 states by default)
		     When reaching this number of state entries, all timeout
		     values become zero, effectively purging all state entries
		     immediately.  This value is used to define the scale
		     factor; it should not actually be reached (set a lower
		     state limit, see below).

	     Adaptive timeouts are enabled by default, with an adaptive.start
	     value equal to 60% of the state limit, and an adaptive.end value
	     equal to 120% of the state limit.	They can be disabled by
	     setting both adaptive.start and adaptive.end to 0.

	     The adaptive timeout values can be defined both globally and for
	     each rule.	 When used on a per-rule basis, the values relate to
	     the number of states created by the rule, otherwise to the total
	     number of states.

	     For example:

		   set timeout tcp.first 120
		   set timeout tcp.established 86400
		   set timeout { adaptive.start 60000, adaptive.end 120000 }
		   set limit states 100000

	     With 90000 state table entries, the timeout values are scaled to
	     50% (tcp.first 60, tcp.established 43200).

     "pfctl -F Reset" restores default values for the following options:
     debug, all limit options, loginterface, reassemble, skip, syncookies, all
     timeouts.

QUEUEING
     Packets can be assigned to queues for the purpose of bandwidth control.
     At least one declaration is required to configure queues, and later any
     packet filtering rule can reference the defined queues by name.  When
     filtering, the last referenced queue name is where any passed packets
     will be queued, while for blocked packets it specifies where any
     resulting ICMP or TCP RST packets should be queued.  If the referenced
     queue does not exist on the outgoing interface, the default queue for
     that interface is used.  Queues attached to an interface build a tree,
     thus each queue can have further child queues.  Only leaf queues, i.e.
     queues without children, can be used to assign packets to.	 The root
     queue must specifically reference an interface, all other queues pick up
     the interfaces they should be created on from their parent queues.

     In the following example, a queue named std is created on the interface
     em0, with 3 child queues ssh, mail and http:

	   queue std on em0 bandwidth 100M
	   queue ssh parent std bandwidth 10M
	   queue mail parent std bandwidth 10M
	   queue http parent std bandwidth 80M default

     The specified bandwidth is the target bandwidth, every queue can receive
     more bandwidth as long as the parent still has some available.  The
     maximum bandwidth that should be assigned to a given queue can be limited
     using the max keyword.  If a limitation isn't imposed on the root queue,
     borrowing can result in saturating the bandwidth of the outgoing
     interface.	 Similarly, a minimum (reserved) bandwidth can be specified:

	   queue ssh parent std bandwidth 10M min 5M max 25M

     For each of these 3 bandwidth specifications an additional burst
     bandwidth and time can be specified:

	   queue ssh parent std bandwidth 10M burst 90M for 100ms

     All bandwidth values are specified as bits per second or using the
     suffixes K, M, and G to represent kilobits, megabits, and gigabits per
     second, respectively.  The value must not exceed the interface bandwidth.

     If multiple connections are assigned the same queue, they're not
     guaranteed to share the queue bandwidth fairly.  An alternative flow
     queue manager can be used to achieve fair sharing by indicating how many
     simultaneous states are expected with a flows option, unless a minimum
     bandwidth has been specified as well.

     When packets are classified by the stateful inspection engine, a flow
     identifier is assigned to all packets belonging to the state, thus
     limiting the number of individual flows that can be recognized by the
     resolution of a flow identifier.  The current implementation is able to
     classify traffic into 32767 distinct flows.  However, efficient fair
     sharing is observed even with a much smaller number of flows.  For
     example on a 10Mbit/s DSL or a cable modem uplink, the following simple
     configuration can be used:

	 queue outq on em0 bandwidth 9M max 9M flows 1024 qlimit 1024 \
	       default

     It's important to specify the upper bound within 90-95% of the expected
     bandwidth and raise the default queue limit.

     If a flows option appears without a bandwidth specification, the flow
     queue manager is selected as the queueing discipline for the
     corresponding interface acting as a default queue for all outgoing
     packets.  In such a scenario, a queueing hierarchy is not supported.

     In addition to the bandwidth and flow specifications, queues support the
     following options:

     default
	   Packets not matched by another queue are assigned to this queue.
	   Exactly one default queue per interface is required.

     on interface
	   Specifies the interface the queue operates on.  If not given, it
	   operates on all matching interfaces.

     parent name
	   Defines which parent queue the queue should be attached to.
	   Mandatory for all queues except root queues.	 The parent queue must
	   exist.

     quantum size
	   Specifies the quantum of service for the flow queue manager.	 The
	   lower the quantum size the more advantage is given to streams of
	   smaller packets at the expense of bulk transfers.  The default
	   value is set to the configured Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU) of
	   the specified interface.

     qlimit limit
	   The maximum number of packets held in the queue.  The default is
	   50.

     Packets can be assigned to queues based on filter rules by using the
     queue keyword.  Normally only one queue is specified; when a second one
     is specified it will instead be used for packets which have a TOS of
     lowdelay and for TCP ACKs with no data payload.

     To continue the previous example, the examples below would specify the
     four referenced queues, plus a few child queues.  Interactive ssh(1)
     sessions get a queue with a minimum bandwidth; scp(1) and sftp(1) bulk
     transfers go to a separate queue.	The queues are then referenced by
     filtering rules.

	 queue rootq on em0 bandwidth 100M max 100M
	 queue http parent rootq bandwidth 60M burst 90M for 100ms
	 queue	developers parent http bandwidth 45M
	 queue	employees parent http bandwidth 15M
	 queue mail parent rootq bandwidth 10M
	 queue ssh parent rootq bandwidth 20M
	 queue	ssh_interactive parent ssh bandwidth 10M min 5M
	 queue	ssh_bulk parent ssh bandwidth 10M
	 queue std parent rootq bandwidth 20M default

	 block return out on em0 inet all set queue std
	 pass out on em0 inet proto tcp from $developerhosts to any port 80 \
	       set queue developers
	 pass out on em0 inet proto tcp from $employeehosts to any port 80 \
	       set queue employees
	 pass out on em0 inet proto tcp from any to any port 22 \
	       set queue(ssh_bulk, ssh_interactive)
	 pass out on em0 inet proto tcp from any to any port 25 \
	       set queue mail

TABLES
     Tables are named structures which can hold a collection of addresses and
     networks.	Lookups against tables in pf(4) are relatively fast, making a
     single rule with tables much more efficient, in terms of processor usage
     and memory consumption, than a large number of rules which differ only in
     IP address (either created explicitly or automatically by rule
     expansion).

     Tables can be used as the source or destination of filter or translation
     rules.  They can also be used for the redirect address of nat-to and
     rdr-to and in the routing options of filter rules, but not for bitmask
     pools.

     Tables can be defined with any of the following pfctl(8) mechanisms.  As
     with macros, reserved words may not be used as table names.

     manually  Persistent tables can be manually created with the add or
	       replace option of pfctl(8), before or after the ruleset has
	       been loaded.

     pf.conf   Table definitions can be placed directly in this file and
	       loaded at the same time as other rules are loaded, atomically.
	       Table definitions inside pf.conf use the table statement, and
	       are especially useful to define non-persistent tables.  The
	       contents of a pre-existing table defined without a list of
	       addresses to initialize it is not altered when pf.conf is
	       loaded.	A table initialized with the empty list, { }, will be
	       cleared on load.

     Tables may be defined with the following attributes:

     const     The const flag prevents the user from altering the contents of
	       the table once it has been created.  Without that flag,
	       pfctl(8) can be used to add or remove addresses from the table
	       at any time, even when running with securelevel(7) = 2.

     counters  The counters flag enables per-address packet and byte counters,
	       which can be displayed with pfctl(8).

     persist   The persist flag forces the kernel to keep the table even when
	       no rules refer to it.  If the flag is not set, the kernel will
	       automatically remove the table when the last rule referring to
	       it is flushed.

     This example creates a table called "private", to hold RFC 1918 private
     network blocks, and a table called "badhosts", which is initially empty.
     A filter rule is set up to block all traffic coming from addresses listed
     in either table:

	   table <private> const { 10/8, 172.16/12, 192.168/16 }
	   table <badhosts> persist
	   block on fxp0 from { <private>, <badhosts> } to any

     The private table cannot have its contents changed and the badhosts table
     will exist even when no active filter rules reference it.	Addresses may
     later be added to the badhosts table, so that traffic from these hosts
     can be blocked by using the following:

	   # pfctl -t badhosts -Tadd 204.92.77.111

     A table can also be initialized with an address list specified in one or
     more external files, using the following syntax:

	   table <spam> persist file "/etc/spammers" file "/etc/openrelays"
	   block on fxp0 from <spam> to any

     The files /etc/spammers and /etc/openrelays list IP addresses, one per
     line.  Any lines beginning with a `#' are treated as comments and
     ignored.  In addition to being specified by IP address, hosts may also be
     specified by their hostname.  When the resolver is called to add a
     hostname to a table, all resulting IPv4 and IPv6 addresses are placed
     into the table.  IP addresses can also be entered in a table by
     specifying a valid interface name, a valid interface group, or the self
     keyword, in which case all addresses assigned to the interface(s) will be
     added to the table.

ANCHORS
     Besides the main ruleset, pf.conf can specify anchor attachment points.
     An anchor is a container that can hold rules, address tables, and other
     anchors.  When evaluation of the main ruleset reaches an anchor rule,
     pf(4) will proceed to evaluate all rules specified in that anchor.

     The following example blocks all packets on the external interface by
     default, then evaluates all rules in the anchor named "spam", and finally
     passes all outgoing connections and incoming connections to port 25:

	   ext_if = "kue0"
	   block on $ext_if all
	   anchor spam
	   pass out on $ext_if all
	   pass in on $ext_if proto tcp from any to $ext_if port smtp

     Anchors can be manipulated through pfctl(8) without reloading the main
     ruleset or other anchors.	This loads a single rule into the anchor,
     which blocks all packets from a specific address:

	   # echo "block in quick from 1.2.3.4 to any" | pfctl -a spam -f -

     The anchor can also be populated by adding a load anchor rule after the
     anchor rule.  When pfctl(8) loads pf.conf, it will also load all the
     rules from the file /etc/pf-spam.conf into the anchor.

	   anchor spam
	   load anchor spam from "/etc/pf-spam.conf"

     An anchor rule can also contain a filter ruleset in a brace-delimited
     block.  In that case, no separate loading of rules into the anchor is
     required.	Brace delimited blocks may contain rules or other brace-
     delimited blocks.	When an anchor is populated this way, the anchor name
     becomes optional.	Since the parser specification for anchor names is a
     string, double quote characters (`"') should be placed around the anchor
     name.

	   anchor "external" on egress {
		   block
		   anchor out {
			   pass proto tcp from any to port { 25, 80, 443 }
		   }
		   pass in proto tcp to any port 22
	   }

     Anchor rules can also specify packet filtering parameters using the same
     syntax as filter rules.  When parameters are used, the anchor rule is
     only evaluated for matching packets.  This allows conditional evaluation
     of anchors, like:

	   block on $ext_if all
	   anchor spam proto tcp from any to any port smtp
	   pass out on $ext_if all
	   pass in on $ext_if proto tcp from any to $ext_if port smtp

     The rules inside anchor "spam" are only evaluated for TCP packets with
     destination port 25.  Hence, the following will only block connections
     from 1.2.3.4 to port 25:

	   # echo "block in quick from 1.2.3.4 to any" | pfctl -a spam -f -

     Matching filter and translation rules marked with the quick option are
     final and abort the evaluation of the rules in other anchors and the main
     ruleset.  If the anchor itself is marked with the quick option, ruleset
     evaluation will terminate when the anchor is exited if the packet is
     matched by any rule within the anchor.

     An anchor references other anchor attachment points using the following
     syntax:

     anchor name
	   Evaluates the filter rules in the specified anchor.

     An anchor has a name which specifies the path where pfctl(8) can be used
     to access the anchor to perform operations on it, such as attaching child
     anchors to it or loading rules into it.  Anchors may be nested, with
     components separated by `/' characters, similar to how file system
     hierarchies are laid out.	The main ruleset is actually the default
     anchor, so filter and translation rules, for example, may also be
     contained in any anchor.

     Anchor rules are evaluated relative to the anchor in which they are
     contained.	 For example, all anchor rules specified in the main ruleset
     will reference anchor attachment points underneath the main ruleset, and
     anchor rules specified in a file loaded from a load anchor rule will be
     attached under that anchor point.

     Anchors may end with the asterisk (`*') character, which signifies that
     all anchors attached at that point should be evaluated in the
     alphabetical ordering of their anchor name.  For example, the following
     will evaluate each rule in each anchor attached to the "spam" anchor:

	   anchor "spam/*"

     Note that it will only evaluate anchors that are directly attached to the
     "spam" anchor, and will not descend to evaluate anchors recursively.

     Since anchors are evaluated relative to the anchor in which they are
     contained, there is a mechanism for accessing the parent and ancestor
     anchors of a given anchor.	 Similar to file system path name resolution,
     if the sequence `..' appears as an anchor path component, the parent
     anchor of the current anchor in the path evaluation at that point will
     become the new current anchor.  As an example, consider the following:

	   # printf 'anchor "spam/allowed"\n' | pfctl -f -
	   # printf 'anchor "../banned"\npass\n' | pfctl -a spam/allowed -f -

     Evaluation of the main ruleset will lead into the spam/allowed anchor,
     which will evaluate the rules in the spam/banned anchor, if any, before
     finally evaluating the pass rule.

STATEFUL FILTERING
     pf(4) filters packets statefully, which has several advantages.  For TCP
     connections, comparing a packet to a state involves checking its sequence
     numbers, as well as TCP timestamps if a rule using the reassemble tcp
     parameter applies to the connection.  If these values are outside the
     narrow windows of expected values, the packet is dropped.	This prevents
     spoofing attacks, such as when an attacker sends packets with a fake
     source address/port but does not know the connection's sequence numbers.
     Similarly, pf(4) knows how to match ICMP replies to states.  For example,
     to allow echo requests (such as those created by ping(8)) out statefully
     and match incoming echo replies correctly to states:

	   pass out inet proto icmp all icmp-type echoreq

     Also, looking up states is usually faster than evaluating rules.  If
     there are 50 rules, all of them are evaluated sequentially in O(n).  Even
     with 50000 states, only 16 comparisons are needed to match a state, since
     states are stored in a binary search tree that allows searches in
     O(log2 n).

     Furthermore, correct handling of ICMP error messages is critical to many
     protocols, particularly TCP.  pf(4) matches ICMP error messages to the
     correct connection, checks them against connection parameters, and passes
     them if appropriate.  For example if an ICMP source quench message
     referring to a stateful TCP connection arrives, it will be matched to the
     state and get passed.

     Finally, state tracking is required for nat-to and rdr-to options, in
     order to track address and port translations and reverse the translation
     on returning packets.

     pf(4) will also create state for other protocols which are effectively
     stateless by nature.  UDP packets are matched to states using only host
     addresses and ports, and other protocols are matched to states using only
     the host addresses.

     If stateless filtering of individual packets is desired, the no state
     keyword can be used to specify that state will not be created if this is
     the last matching rule.  Note that packets which match neither block nor
     pass rules, and thus are passed by default, are effectively passed as if
     no state had been specified.

     A number of parameters can also be set to affect how pf(4) handles state
     tracking, as detailed below.

   State Modulation
     Much of the security derived from TCP is attributable to how well the
     initial sequence numbers (ISNs) are chosen.  Some popular stack
     implementations choose very poor ISNs and thus are normally susceptible
     to ISN prediction exploits.  By applying a modulate state rule to a TCP
     connection, pf(4) will create a high quality random sequence number for
     each connection endpoint.

     The modulate state directive implicitly keeps state on the rule and is
     only applicable to TCP connections.

     For instance:

	   block all
	   pass out proto tcp from any to any modulate state
	   pass in  proto tcp from any to any port 25 flags S/SFRA \
		 modulate state

     Note that modulated connections will not recover when the state table is
     lost (firewall reboot, flushing the state table, etc.).  pf(4) will not
     be able to infer a connection again after the state table flushes the
     connection's modulator.  When the state is lost, the connection may be
     left dangling until the respective endpoints time out the connection.  It
     is possible on a fast local network for the endpoints to start an ACK
     storm while trying to resynchronize after the loss of the modulator.  The
     default flags settings (or a more strict equivalent) should be used on
     modulate state rules to prevent ACK storms.

     Note that alternative methods are available to prevent loss of the state
     table and allow for firewall failover.  See carp(4) and pfsync(4) for
     further information.

   SYN Proxy
     By default, pf(4) passes packets that are part of a TCP handshake between
     the endpoints.  The synproxy state option can be used to cause pf(4)
     itself to complete the handshake with the active endpoint, perform a
     handshake with the passive endpoint, and then forward packets between the
     endpoints.

     No packets are sent to the passive endpoint before the active endpoint
     has completed the handshake, hence so-called SYN floods with spoofed
     source addresses will not reach the passive endpoint, as the sender can't
     complete the handshake.

     The proxy is transparent to both endpoints; they each see a single
     connection from/to the other endpoint.  pf(4) chooses random initial
     sequence numbers for both handshakes.  Once the handshakes are completed,
     the sequence number modulators (see previous section) are used to
     translate further packets of the connection.  synproxy state includes
     modulate state.

     Rules with synproxy state will not work if pf(4) operates on a bridge(4).
     Also they act on incoming SYN packets only.

     Example:

	   pass in proto tcp from any to any port www synproxy state

   Stateful Tracking Options
     A number of options related to stateful tracking can be applied on a per-
     rule basis.  One of keep state, modulate state, or synproxy state must be
     specified explicitly to apply these options to a rule.

     floating
	   States can match packets on any interfaces (the opposite of
	   if-bound).  This is the default.
     if-bound
	   States are bound to an interface (the opposite of floating).
     max number
	   Limits the number of concurrent states the rule may create.	When
	   this limit is reached, further packets that would create state are
	   dropped until existing states time out.
     no-sync
	   Prevent state changes for states created by this rule from
	   appearing on the pfsync(4) interface.
     pflow
	   States created by this rule are exported on the pflow(4) interface.
     sloppy
	   For TCP, uses a sloppy connection tracker that does not check
	   sequence numbers at all, which makes insertion and ICMP teardown
	   attacks way easier.	This is intended to be used in situations
	   where one does not see all packets of a connection, e.g. in
	   asymmetric routing situations.  It cannot be used with modulate
	   state or synproxy state.  For ICMP, this option allows states to be
	   created from replies, not just requests.
     timeout seconds
	   Changes the timeout values used for states created by this rule.
	   For a list of all valid timeout names, see OPTIONS above.

     Multiple options can be specified, separated by commas:

	   pass in proto tcp from any to any \
		 port www keep state \
		 (max 100, source-track rule, max-src-nodes 75, \
		 max-src-states 3, tcp.established 60, tcp.closing 5)

     When the source-track keyword is specified, the number of states per
     source IP is tracked.

     source-track global
	   The number of states created by all rules that use this option is
	   limited.  Each rule can specify different max-src-nodes and
	   max-src-states options, however state entries created by any
	   participating rule count towards each individual rule's limits.
     source-track rule
	   The maximum number of states created by this rule is limited by the
	   rule's max-src-nodes and max-src-states options.  Only state
	   entries created by this particular rule count toward the rule's
	   limits.

     The following limits can be set:

     max-src-nodes number
	   Limits the maximum number of source addresses which can
	   simultaneously have state table entries.
     max-src-states number
	   Limits the maximum number of simultaneous state entries that a
	   single source address can create with this rule.

     For stateful TCP connections, limits on established connections
     (connections which have completed the TCP 3-way handshake) can also be
     enforced per source IP.

     max-src-conn number
	   Limits the maximum number of simultaneous TCP connections which
	   have completed the 3-way handshake that a single host can make.
     max-src-conn-rate number/seconds
	   Limit the rate of new connections over a time interval.  The
	   connection rate is an approximation calculated as a moving average.

     When one of these limits is reached, further packets that would create
     state are dropped until existing states time out.

     Because the 3-way handshake ensures that the source address is not being
     spoofed, more aggressive action can be taken based on these limits.  With
     the overload <table> state option, source IP addresses which hit either
     of the limits on established connections will be added to the named
     table.  This table can be used in the ruleset to block further activity
     from the offending host, redirect it to a tarpit process, or restrict its
     bandwidth.

     The optional flush keyword kills all states created by the matching rule
     which originate from the host which exceeds these limits.	The global
     modifier to the flush command kills all states originating from the
     offending host, regardless of which rule created the state.

     For example, the following rules will protect the webserver against hosts
     making more than 100 connections in 10 seconds.  Any host which connects
     faster than this rate will have its address added to the <bad_hosts>
     table and have all states originating from it flushed.  Any new packets
     arriving from this host will be dropped unconditionally by the block
     rule.

	   block quick from <bad_hosts>
	   pass in on $ext_if proto tcp to $webserver port www keep state \
		 (max-src-conn-rate 100/10, overload <bad_hosts> flush global)

TRAFFIC NORMALISATION
     Traffic normalisation is a broad umbrella term for aspects of the packet
     filter which deal with verifying packets, packet fragments, spoof
     traffic, and other irregularities.

   Scrub
     Scrub involves sanitising packet content in such a way that there are no
     ambiguities in packet interpretation on the receiving side.  It is
     invoked with the scrub option, added to regular rules.

     Parameters are specified enclosed in parentheses.	At least one of the
     following parameters must be specified:

     max-mss number
	   Reduces the maximum segment size (MSS) on TCP SYN packets to be no
	   greater than number.	 This is sometimes required in scenarios where
	   the two endpoints of a TCP connection are not able to carry similar
	   sized packets and the resulting mismatch can lead to packet
	   fragmentation or loss.  Note that setting the MSS this way can have
	   undesirable effects, such as interfering with the OS detection
	   features of pf(4).

     min-ttl number
	   Enforces a minimum TTL for matching IP packets.

     no-df
	   Clears the "dont-fragment" bit from a matching IPv4 packet.	Some
	   operating systems have NFS implementations which are known to
	   generate fragmented packets with the "dont-fragment" bit set.
	   pf(4) will drop such fragmented "dont-fragment" packets unless
	   no-df is specified.

	   Unfortunately some operating systems also generate their
	   "dont-fragment" packets with a zero IP identification field.
	   Clearing the "dont-fragment" bit on packets with a zero IP ID may
	   cause deleterious results if an upstream router later fragments the
	   packet.  Using random-id is recommended in combination with no-df
	   to ensure unique IP identifiers.

     random-id
	   Replaces the IPv4 identification field with random values to
	   compensate for predictable values generated by many hosts.  This
	   option only applies to packets that are not fragmented after the
	   optional fragment reassembly.

     reassemble tcp
	   Statefully normalises TCP connections.  reassemble tcp performs the
	   following normalisations:

	   TTL
	   Neither side of the connection is allowed to reduce their IP TTL.
	   An attacker may send a packet such that it reaches the firewall,
	   affects the firewall state, and expires before reaching the
	   destination host.  reassemble tcp will raise the TTL of all packets
	   back up to the highest value seen on the connection.

	   Timestamp Modulation
	   Modern TCP stacks will send a timestamp on every TCP packet and
	   echo the other endpoint's timestamp back to them.  Many operating
	   systems will merely start the timestamp at zero when first booted,
	   and increment it several times a second.  The uptime of the host
	   can be deduced by reading the timestamp and multiplying by a
	   constant.  Also observing several different timestamps can be used
	   to count hosts behind a NAT device.	And spoofing TCP packets into
	   a connection requires knowing or guessing valid timestamps.
	   Timestamps merely need to be monotonically increasing and not
	   derived off a guessable base time.  reassemble tcp will cause scrub
	   to modulate the TCP timestamps with a random number.

	   Extended PAWS Checks
	   There is a problem with TCP on long fat pipes, in that a packet
	   might get delayed for longer than it takes the connection to wrap
	   its 32-bit sequence space.  In such an occurrence, the old packet
	   would be indistinguishable from a new packet and would be accepted
	   as such.  The solution to this is called PAWS: Protection Against
	   Wrapped Sequence numbers.  It protects against it by making sure
	   the timestamp on each packet does not go backwards.	reassemble tcp
	   also makes sure the timestamp on the packet does not go forward
	   more than the RFC allows.  By doing this, pf(4) artificially
	   extends the security of TCP sequence numbers by 10 to 18 bits when
	   the host uses appropriately randomized timestamps, since a blind
	   attacker would have to guess the timestamp as well.

     For example:

	   match in all scrub (no-df random-id max-mss 1440)

   Fragment Handling
     The size of IP datagrams (packets) can be significantly larger than the
     maximum transmission unit (MTU) of the network.  In cases when it is
     necessary or more efficient to send such large packets, the large packet
     will be fragmented into many smaller packets that will each fit onto the
     wire.  Unfortunately for a firewalling device, only the first logical
     fragment will contain the necessary header information for the
     subprotocol that allows pf(4) to filter on things such as TCP ports or to
     perform NAT.

     One alternative is to filter individual fragments with filter rules.  If
     packet reassembly is turned off, it is passed to the filter.  Filter
     rules with matching IP header parameters decide whether the fragment is
     passed or blocked, in the same way as complete packets are filtered.
     Without reassembly, fragments can only be filtered based on IP header
     fields (source/destination address, protocol), since subprotocol header
     fields are not available (TCP/UDP port numbers, ICMP code/type).  The
     fragment option can be used to restrict filter rules to apply only to
     fragments, but not complete packets.  Filter rules without the fragment
     option still apply to fragments, if they only specify IP header fields.
     For instance:

	   pass in proto tcp from any to any port 80

     The rule above never applies to a fragment, even if the fragment is part
     of a TCP packet with destination port 80, because without reassembly this
     information is not available for each fragment.  This also means that
     fragments cannot create new or match existing state table entries, which
     makes stateful filtering and address translation (NAT, redirection) for
     fragments impossible.

     In most cases, the benefits of reassembly outweigh the additional memory
     cost, so reassembly is on by default.

     The memory allocated for fragment caching can be limited using pfctl(8).
     Once this limit is reached, fragments that would have to be cached are
     dropped until other entries time out.  The timeout value can also be
     adjusted.

     When forwarding reassembled IPv6 packets, pf refragments them with the
     original maximum fragment size.  This allows the sender to determine the
     optimal fragment size by path MTU discovery.

   Blocking Spoofed Traffic
     Spoofing is the faking of IP addresses, typically for malicious purposes.
     The antispoof directive expands to a set of filter rules which will block
     all traffic with a source IP from the network(s) directly connected to
     the specified interface(s) from entering the system through any other
     interface.

     For example:
	   antispoof for lo0

     Expands to:
	   block drop in on ! lo0 inet from 127.0.0.1/8 to any
	   block drop in on ! lo0 inet6 from ::1 to any

     For non-loopback interfaces, there are additional rules to block incoming
     packets with a source IP address identical to the interface's IP(s).  For
     example, assuming the interface wi0 had an IP address of 10.0.0.1 and a
     netmask of 255.255.255.0:

	   antispoof for wi0 inet

     Expands to:
	   block drop in on ! wi0 inet from 10.0.0.0/24 to any
	   block drop in inet from 10.0.0.1 to any

     Caveat: Rules created by the antispoof directive interfere with packets
     sent over loopback interfaces to local addresses.	One should pass these
     explicitly.

OPERATING SYSTEM FINGERPRINTING
     Passive OS fingerprinting is a mechanism to inspect nuances of a TCP
     connection's initial SYN packet and guess at the host's operating system.
     Unfortunately these nuances are easily spoofed by an attacker so the
     fingerprint is not useful in making security decisions.  But the
     fingerprint is typically accurate enough to make policy decisions upon.

     The fingerprints may be specified by operating system class, by version,
     or by subtype/patchlevel.	The class of an operating system is typically
     the vendor or genre and would be OpenBSD for the pf(4) firewall itself.
     The version of the oldest available OpenBSD release on the main FTP site
     would be 2.6 and the fingerprint would be written as:

	   "OpenBSD 2.6"

     The subtype of an operating system is typically used to describe the
     patchlevel if that patch led to changes in the TCP stack behavior.	 In
     the case of OpenBSD, the only subtype is for a fingerprint that was
     normalised by the no-df scrub option and would be specified as:

	   "OpenBSD 3.3 no-df"

     Fingerprints for most popular operating systems are provided by pf.os(5).
     Once pf(4) is running, a complete list of known operating system
     fingerprints may be listed by running:

	   # pfctl -so

     Filter rules can enforce policy at any level of operating system
     specification assuming a fingerprint is present.  Policy could limit
     traffic to approved operating systems or even ban traffic from hosts that
     aren't at the latest service pack.

     The unknown class can also be used as the fingerprint which will match
     packets for which no operating system fingerprint is known.

     Examples:

	   pass	 out proto tcp from any os OpenBSD
	   block out proto tcp from any os Doors
	   block out proto tcp from any os "Doors PT"
	   block out proto tcp from any os "Doors PT SP3"
	   block out from any os "unknown"
	   pass on lo0 proto tcp from any os "OpenBSD 3.3 lo0"

     Operating system fingerprinting is limited only to the TCP SYN packet.
     This means that it will not work on other protocols and will not match a
     currently established connection.

     Caveat: operating system fingerprints are occasionally wrong.  There are
     three problems: an attacker can trivially craft packets to appear as any
     operating system; an operating system patch could change the stack
     behavior and no fingerprints will match it until the database is updated;
     and multiple operating systems may have the same fingerprint.

EXAMPLES
     In this example, the external interface is kue0.  We use a macro for the
     interface name, so it can be changed easily.  All incoming traffic is
     "normalised", and everything is blocked and logged by default.

	 ext_if = "kue0"
	 match in all scrub (no-df max-mss 1440)
	 block return log on $ext_if all

     Here we specifically block packets we don't want: anything coming from
     source we have no back routes for; packets whose ingress interface does
     not match the one in the route back to their source address; anything
     that does not have our address (157.161.48.183) as source; broadcasts
     (cable modem noise); and anything from reserved address space or invalid
     addresses.

	 block in from no-route to any
	 block in from urpf-failed to any
	 block out log quick on $ext_if from ! 157.161.48.183 to any
	 block in quick on $ext_if from any to 255.255.255.255
	 block in log quick on $ext_if from { 10.0.0.0/8, 172.16.0.0/12, \
	     192.168.0.0/16, 255.255.255.255/32 } to any

     For ICMP, pass out/in ping queries.  State matching is done on host
     addresses and ICMP ID (not type/code), so replies (like 0/0 for 8/0) will
     match queries.  ICMP error messages (which always refer to a TCP/UDP
     packet) are handled by the TCP/UDP states.

	 pass on $ext_if inet proto icmp all icmp-type 8 code 0

     For UDP, pass out all UDP connections.  DNS connections are passed in.

	 pass out on $ext_if proto udp all
	 pass in on $ext_if proto udp from any to any port domain

     For TCP, pass out all TCP connections and modulate state.	SSH, SMTP,
     DNS, and IDENT connections are passed in.	We do not allow Windows 9x
     SMTP connections since they are typically a viral worm.

	 pass out on $ext_if proto tcp all modulate state
	 pass in on $ext_if proto tcp from any to any \
	     port { ssh, smtp, domain, auth }
	 block in on $ext_if proto tcp from any \
	     os { "Windows 95", "Windows 98" } to any port smtp

     Here we pass in/out all IPv6 traffic: note that we have to enable this in
     two different ways, on both our physical interface and our tunnel.

	 pass quick on gif0 inet6
	 pass quick on $ext_if proto ipv6

     This example illustrates packet tagging.  There are three interfaces:
     $int_if, $ext_if, and $wifi_if (wireless).	 NAT is being done on $ext_if
     for all outgoing packets.	Packets in on $int_if are tagged and passed
     out on $ext_if.  All other outgoing packets (i.e. packets from the
     wireless network) are only permitted to access port 80.

	 pass in on $int_if from any to any tag INTNET
	 pass in on $wifi_if from any to any

	 block out on $ext_if from any to any
	 pass out quick on $ext_if tagged INTNET
	 pass out on $ext_if proto tcp from any to any port 80

     In this example, we tag incoming packets as they are redirected to
     spamd(8).	The tag is used to pass those packets through the packet
     filter.

	 match in on $ext_if inet proto tcp from <spammers> to port smtp \
	      tag SPAMD rdr-to 127.0.0.1 port spamd

	 block in on $ext_if
	 pass in on $ext_if inet proto tcp tagged SPAMD

     This example maps incoming requests on port 80 to port 8080, on which a
     daemon is running (because, for example, it is not run as root, and
     therefore lacks permission to bind to port 80).

	 match in on $ext_if proto tcp from any to any port 80 \
	       rdr-to 127.0.0.1 port 8080

     If a pass rule is used with the quick modifier, packets matching the
     translation rule are passed without inspecting subsequent filter rules.

	 pass in quick on $ext_if proto tcp from any to any port 80 \
	       rdr-to 127.0.0.1 port 8080

     In the example below, vlan12 is configured as 192.168.168.1; the machine
     translates all packets coming from 192.168.168.0/24 to 204.92.77.111 when
     they are going out any interface except vlan12.  This has the net effect
     of making traffic from the 192.168.168.0/24 network appear as though it
     is the Internet routable address 204.92.77.111 to nodes behind any
     interface on the router except for the nodes on vlan12.  Thus,
     192.168.168.1 can talk to the 192.168.168.0/24 nodes.

	 match out on ! vlan12 from 192.168.168.0/24 to any nat-to 204.92.77.111

     In the example below, the machine sits between a fake internal
     144.19.74.* network, and a routable external IP of 204.92.77.100.	The
     last rule excludes protocol AH from being translated.

	 pass out on $ext_if from 144.19.74.0/24 nat-to 204.92.77.100
	 pass out on $ext_if proto ah from 144.19.74.0/24

     In the example below, packets bound for one specific server, as well as
     those generated by the sysadmins are not proxied; all other connections
     are.

	 pass in on $int_if proto { tcp, udp } from any to any port 80 \
	       rdr-to 127.0.0.1 port 80
	 pass in on $int_if proto { tcp, udp } from any to $server port 80
	 pass in on $int_if proto { tcp, udp } from $sysadmins to any port 80

     This example maps outgoing packets' source port to an assigned proxy port
     instead of an arbitrary port.  In this case, proxy outgoing isakmp with
     port 500 on the gateway.

	 match out on $ext_if inet proto udp from any port isakmp to any \
	     nat-to ($ext_if) port 500

     One more example uses rdr-to to redirect a TCP and UDP port to an
     internal machine.

	 match in on $ext_if inet proto tcp from any to ($ext_if) port 8080 \
	       rdr-to 10.1.2.151 port 22
	 match in on $ext_if inet proto udp from any to ($ext_if) port 8080 \
	       rdr-to 10.1.2.151 port 53

     In this example, a NAT gateway is set up to translate internal addresses
     using a pool of public addresses (192.0.2.16/28).	A given source address
     is always translated to the same pool address by using the source-hash
     keyword.  The gateway also translates incoming web server connections to
     a group of web servers on the internal network.

	 match out on $ext_if inet from any to any nat-to 192.0.2.16/28 \
	     source-hash
	 match in  on $ext_if proto tcp from any to any port 80 \
	     rdr-to { 10.1.2.155 weight 2, 10.1.2.160 weight 1, \
		      10.1.2.161 weight 8 } round-robin

     The bidirectional address translation example uses a single binat-to rule
     that expands to a nat-to and an rdr-to rule.

	 pass on $ext_if from 10.1.2.120 to any binat-to 192.0.2.17

     The previous example is identical to the following set of rules:

	 pass out on $ext_if inet from 10.1.2.120 to any \
	       nat-to 192.0.2.17 static-port
	 pass in on $ext_if inet from any to 192.0.2.17 rdr-to 10.1.2.120

     In the example below, a router handling both address families translates
     an internal IPv4 subnet to IPv6 using the well-known 64:ff9b::/96 prefix:

	 pass in on $v4_if inet af-to inet6 from ($v6_if) to 64:ff9b::/96

     Paired with the example above, the example below can be used on another
     router handling both address families to translate back to IPv4:

	 pass in on $v6_if inet6 to 64:ff9b::/96 af-to inet from ($v4_if)

GRAMMAR
     Syntax for pf.conf in BNF:

     line	    = ( option | pf-rule |
		      antispoof-rule | queue-rule | anchor-rule |
		      anchor-close | load-anchor | table-rule | include )

     option	    = "set" ( [ "timeout" ( timeout | "{" timeout-list "}" ) ] |
		      [ "ruleset-optimization" [ "none" | "basic" |
		      "profile" ] ] |
		      [ "optimization" [ "default" | "normal" | "high-latency" |
		      "satellite" | "aggressive" | "conservative" ] ]
		      [ "limit" ( limit-item | "{" limit-list "}" ) ] |
		      [ "loginterface" ( interface-name | "none" ) ] |
		      [ "block-policy" ( "drop" | "return" ) ] |
		      [ "state-policy" ( "if-bound" | "floating" ) ]
		      [ "state-defaults" state-opts ]
		      [ "fingerprints" filename ] |
		      [ "skip on" ifspec ] |
		      [ "debug" ( "emerg" | "alert" | "crit" | "err" |
		      "warning" | "notice" | "info" | "debug" ) ] |
		      [ "reassemble" ( "yes" | "no" ) [ "no-df" ] ] )

     pf-rule	    = action [ ( "in" | "out" ) ]
		      [ "log" [ "(" logopts ")"] ] [ "quick" ]
		      [ "on" ( ifspec | "rdomain" number ) ] [ af ]
		      [ protospec ] [ hosts ] [ filteropts ]

     logopts	    = logopt [ [ "," ] logopts ]
     logopt	    = "all" | "matches" | "user" | "to" interface-name

     filteropts	    = filteropt [ [ "," ] filteropts ]
     filteropt	    = user | group | flags | icmp-type | icmp6-type |
		      "tos" tos |
		      ( "no" | "keep" | "modulate" | "synproxy" ) "state"
		      [ "(" state-opts ")" ] | "scrub" "(" scrubopts ")" |
		      "fragment" | "allow-opts" | "once" |
		      "divert-packet" "port" port | "divert-reply" |
		      "divert-to" host "port" port |
		      "label" string | "tag" string | [ "!" ] "tagged" string |
		      "max-pkt-rate" number "/" seconds |
		      "set delay" number |
		      "set prio" ( number | "(" number [ [ "," ] number ] ")" ) |
		      "set queue" ( string | "(" string [ [ "," ] string ] ")" ) |
		      "rtable" number | "probability" number"%" | "prio" number |
		      "af-to" af "from" ( redirhost | "{" redirhost-list "}" )
		      [ "to" ( redirhost | "{" redirhost-list "}" ) ] |
		      "binat-to" ( redirhost | "{" redirhost-list "}" )
		      [ portspec ] [ pooltype ] |
		      "rdr-to" ( redirhost | "{" redirhost-list "}" )
		      [ portspec ] [ pooltype ] |
		      "nat-to" ( redirhost | "{" redirhost-list "}" )
		      [ portspec ] [ pooltype ] [ "static-port" ] |
		      [ route ] | [ "set tos" tos ] |
		      [ [ "!" ] "received-on" ( interface-name | interface-group ) ]

     scrubopts	    = scrubopt [ [ "," ] scrubopts ]
     scrubopt	    = "no-df" | "min-ttl" number | "max-mss" number |
		      "reassemble tcp" | "random-id"

     antispoof-rule = "antispoof" [ "log" ] [ "quick" ]
		      "for" ifspec [ af ] [ "label" string ]

     table-rule	    = "table" "<" string ">" [ tableopts ]
     tableopts	    = tableopt [ tableopts ]
     tableopt	    = "persist" | "const" | "counters" |
		      "file" string | "{" [ tableaddrs ] "}"
     tableaddrs	    = tableaddr-spec [ [ "," ] tableaddrs ]
     tableaddr-spec = [ "!" ] tableaddr [ "/" mask-bits ]
     tableaddr	    = hostname | ifspec | "self" |
		      ipv4-dotted-quad | ipv6-coloned-hex

     queue-rule	    = "queue" string [ "on" interface-name ] queueopts-list

     anchor-rule    = "anchor" [ string ] [ ( "in" | "out" ) ] [ "on" ifspec ]
		      [ af ] [ protospec ] [ hosts ] [ filteropt-list ] [ "{" ]

     anchor-close   = "}"

     load-anchor    = "load anchor" string "from" filename

     queueopts-list = queueopts-list queueopts | queueopts
     queueopts	    = ([ "bandwidth" bandwidth ] | [ "min" bandwidth ] |
		      [ "max" bandwidth ] | [ "parent" string ] |
		      [ "default" ]) |
		      ([ "flows" number ] | [ "quantum" number ]) |
		      [ "qlimit" number ]

     bandwidth	    = bandwidth-spec [ "burst" bandwidth-spec "for" number "ms" ]
     bandwidth-spec = number ( "" | "K" | "M" | "G" )

     action	    = "pass" | "match" | "block" [ return ]
     return	    = "drop" | "return" |
		      "return-rst" [ "(" "ttl" number ")" ] |
		      "return-icmp" [ "(" icmpcode [ [ "," ] icmp6code ] ")" ] |
		      "return-icmp6" [ "(" icmp6code ")" ]
     icmpcode	    = ( icmp-code-name | icmp-code-number )
     icmp6code	    = ( icmp6-code-name | icmp6-code-number )

     ifspec	    = ( [ "!" ] ( interface-name | interface-group ) ) |
		      "{" interface-list "}"
     interface-list = [ "!" ] ( interface-name | interface-group )
		      [ [ "," ] interface-list ]
     route	    = ( "route-to" | "reply-to" | "dup-to" )
		      ( redirhost | "{" redirhost-list "}" )
     af		    = "inet" | "inet6"

     protospec	    = "proto" ( proto-name | proto-number |
		      "{" proto-list "}" )
     proto-list	    = ( proto-name | proto-number ) [ [ "," ] proto-list ]

     hosts	    = "all" |
		      "from" ( "any" | "no-route" | "urpf-failed" | "self" |
		      host | "{" host-list "}" | "route" string ) [ port ]
		      [ os ]
		      "to"   ( "any" | "no-route" | "self" | host |
		      "{" host-list "}" | "route" string ) [ port ]

     ipspec	    = "any" | host | "{" host-list "}"
     host	    = [ "!" ] ( address [ "weight" number ] |
		      address [ "/" mask-bits ] [ "weight" number ] |
		      "<" string ">" )
     redirhost	    = address [ "/" mask-bits ]
     address	    = ( interface-name | interface-group |
		      "(" ( interface-name | interface-group ) ")" |
		      hostname | ipv4-dotted-quad | ipv6-coloned-hex )
     host-list	    = host [ [ "," ] host-list ]
     redirhost-list = redirhost [ [ "," ] redirhost-list ]

     port	    = "port" ( unary-op | binary-op | "{" op-list "}" )
     portspec	    = "port" ( number | name ) [ ":" ( "*" | number | name ) ]
     os		    = "os"  ( os-name | "{" os-list "}" )
     user	    = "user" ( unary-op | binary-op | "{" op-list "}" )
     group	    = "group" ( unary-op | binary-op | "{" op-list "}" )

     unary-op	    = [ "=" | "!=" | "<" | "<=" | ">" | ">=" ]
		      ( name | number )
     binary-op	    = number ( "<>" | "><" | ":" ) number
     op-list	    = ( unary-op | binary-op ) [ [ "," ] op-list ]

     os-name	    = operating-system-name
     os-list	    = os-name [ [ "," ] os-list ]

     flags	    = "flags" ( [ flag-set ] "/"  flag-set | "any" )
     flag-set	    = [ "F" ] [ "S" ] [ "R" ] [ "P" ] [ "A" ] [ "U" ] [ "E" ]
		      [ "W" ]

     icmp-type	    = "icmp-type" ( icmp-type-code | "{" icmp-list "}" )
     icmp6-type	    = "icmp6-type" ( icmp-type-code | "{" icmp-list "}" )
     icmp-type-code = ( icmp-type-name | icmp-type-number )
		      [ "code" ( icmp-code-name | icmp-code-number ) ]
     icmp-list	    = icmp-type-code [ [ "," ] icmp-list ]

     tos	    = ( "lowdelay" | "throughput" | "reliability" |
		      [ "0x" ] number )

     state-opts	    = state-opt [ [ "," ] state-opts ]
     state-opt	    = ( "max" number | "no-sync" | timeout | "sloppy" |
		      "pflow" | "source-track" [ ( "rule" | "global" ) ] |
		      "max-src-nodes" number | "max-src-states" number |
		      "max-src-conn" number |
		      "max-src-conn-rate" number "/" number |
		      "overload" "<" string ">" [ "flush" [ "global" ] ] |
		      "if-bound" | "floating" )

     timeout-list   = timeout [ [ "," ] timeout-list ]
     timeout	    = ( "tcp.first" | "tcp.opening" | "tcp.established" |
		      "tcp.closing" | "tcp.finwait" | "tcp.closed" | "tcp.tsdiff" |
		      "udp.first" | "udp.single" | "udp.multiple" |
		      "icmp.first" | "icmp.error" |
		      "other.first" | "other.single" | "other.multiple" |
		      "frag" | "interval" | "src.track" |
		      "adaptive.start" | "adaptive.end" ) number

     limit-list	    = limit-item [ [ "," ] limit-list ]
     limit-item	    = ( "states" | "frags" | "src-nodes" | "tables" |
		      "table-entries" ) number

     pooltype	    = ( "bitmask" | "least-states" |
		      "random" | "round-robin" |
		      "source-hash" [ ( hex-key | string-key ) ] )
		      [ "sticky-address" ]

     include	    = "include" filename

FILES
     /etc/hosts		    Host name database.
     /etc/pf.conf	    Default location of the ruleset file.
     /etc/examples/pf.conf  Example ruleset file.
     /etc/pf.os		    Default location of OS fingerprints.
     /etc/protocols	    Protocol name database.
     /etc/services	    Service name database.

SEE ALSO
     pf(4), pflow(4), pfsync(4), pf.os(5), pfctl(8), pflogd(8)

HISTORY
     The pf.conf file format first appeared in OpenBSD 3.0.

OpenBSD 7.8			 July 7, 2025			    PF.CONF(5)
