UNVEIL(2)		      System Calls Manual		     UNVEIL(2)

NAME
     unveil - unveil parts of a restricted filesystem view

SYNOPSIS
     #include <unistd.h>

     int
     unveil(const char *path, const char *permissions);

DESCRIPTION
     The first call to unveil() that specifies a path removes visibility of
     the entire filesystem from all other filesystem-related system calls
     (such as open(2), chmod(2) and rename(2)), except for the specified path
     and permissions.

     The unveil() system call remains capable of traversing to any path in the
     filesystem, so additional calls can set permissions at other points in
     the filesystem hierarchy.

     After establishing a collection of path and permissions rules, future
     calls to unveil() can be disabled by passing two NULL arguments.
     Alternatively, pledge(2) may be used to remove the "unveil" promise.

     The permissions argument points to a string consisting of zero or more of
     the following characters:

	   r	 Make path available for read operations, corresponding to the
		 pledge(2) promise "rpath".
	   w	 Make path available for write operations, corresponding to
		 the pledge(2) promise "wpath".
	   x	 Make path available for execute operations, corresponding to
		 the pledge(2) promise "exec".
	   c	 Allow path to be created and removed, corresponding to the
		 pledge(2) promise "cpath".

     A path that is a directory will enable all filesystem access underneath
     path using permissions if and only if no more specific matching unveil()
     exists at a lower level.  Directories are remembered at the time of a
     call to unveil().	This means that a directory that is removed and
     recreated after a call to unveil() will appear to not exist.

     Non-directory paths are remembered by name within their containing
     directory, and so may be created, removed, or re-created after a call to
     unveil() and still appear to exist.

     Attempts to access paths not allowed by unveil() will result in an error
     of EACCES when the permissions argument does not match the attempted
     operation.	 ENOENT is returned for paths for which no unveil()
     permissions qualify.  After a process has terminated, lastcomm(1) will
     mark it with the `U' flag if file access was prevented by unveil().

     unveil() use can be tricky because programs misbehave badly when their
     files unexpectedly disappear.  In many cases it is easier to unveil the
     directories in which an application makes use of files.

RETURN VALUES
     Upon successful completion, the value 0 is returned; otherwise the
     value -1 is returned and the global variable errno is set to indicate the
     error.

ERRORS
     [E2BIG]		The addition of path would exceed the per-process
			limit for unveiled paths.

     [EFAULT]		path or permissions points outside the process's
			allocated address space.

     [ENOENT]		A directory in path did not exist.

     [EINVAL]		An invalid value of permissions was used.

     [EPERM]		An attempt to increase permissions was made, or the
			path was not accessible, or unveil() was called after
			locking.

HISTORY
     The unveil() system call first appeared in OpenBSD 6.4.

OpenBSD 7.8		       September 6, 2021		     UNVEIL(2)
